# Undergraduate Projects
This repository contains various projects I have completed during my undergraduate studies. Below is a brief summary of what each project folder includes and the programming languages used.

___

### Mydlarz Lab Disease Study
This was my first coding project during my time conducting research at the Mydlarz Lab. My PI, Emily Van Buren, assigned me to assist with her chapter project on disease classification in coral host species (Colpophyllia natans, Orbicella faveolata, Orbicella annularis, Pseudodiploria strigosa, Porites astreoides, Siderastrea siderea, and Montastraea cavernosa) and their symbionts. She provided pipelines for machine learning techniques such as SVM, count normalization, presence/absence studies, differential expression analysis, and BBSplit, allowing me to practice and familiarize myself with how different -omics data integrate. The outputs in this folder were generated by me, with R as the primary tool used to produce results. These techniques were also used in the <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/384161040_Machine_Learning_Approaches_for_Classifying_and_Characterizing_Coral_Diseases">machine learning disease classification</a> paper.

This project includes code pipelines and outputs for:

BBSplit (R) / Support Vector Machine (SVM) Learning (R) / Presence-Absence Studies (R) / Venn Diagrams for SVM Output (R) / Differential Expression Analysis & Count Normalization (R) / Average Plots (R)

___

### Mydlarz Lab Melanin Study
Branching off from programming in R, I then learned to use secure shell script (SSH) and primarily work on my terminal using linux/unix commands. I was granted access to UTA's High Performance Computing Clustter (UTA HPC) and used programs such as Hmmer to obtain outputs. All code and files in this folder are created by me and were used in the <a href="https://www.researchgate.net/publication/382369267_Structural_and_Evolutionary_Relationships_of_Melanin_Cascade_Proteins_in_Cnidarian_Innate_Immunity">melanin study paper</a>. I also worked with Excel and R in this project in order to clean the tabular outputs generated by hmmer so that we could match genes of M. cavernosa to humans in the tyrosinase metabolic pathway.

This project includes code pipelines and outputs for:

Hmmer (HPC Terminal) / Procedure on how to clean tabular outputs (Excel) / How to melt data (R) / Organizing and cleaning melted data (R)

___

### Python 1 Coral Bleaching Project
This was my final project for my Python 1 class. The topic was open to our choice, and my teammates, Darlene Eligado, Saige Young, and I, chose to focus on global bleaching in coral reefs using a <a href="https://www.bco-dmo.org/dataset/773466">dataset</a> provided by Robert van Woesik and his team. We used Jupyter Notebook to carry out the project, which included data understanding, cleaning, preprocessing, and visualization. Our three main objectives were to visualize global bleaching events, hypothesize the best explanation for these events (temperature, wind patterns, turbidity), and determine when they began occurring across the top locations.

This project includes code pipelines and outputs for: 

Data pre-processing and visualization pipeline (Jupyter Notebook) / Bleaching event locations map (HTML) / Project presentation (PDF)

___

### Undergrad Research Opportunity Program (UROP)
UTA's UROP program is an intensive research experience where undergraduate students conduct supervised research and participate in professional development. For my project, I chose to apply machine learning algorithms to identify key variables that influence symbiont gene expression in infected corals. Through this experience, I learned to perform and analyze principal component analysis (PCA), interactive principal component analysis (IPCA), tximport, gene count normalization, differential expression analysis, and the cleaning and organizing of gene counts.

This project includes code pipelines and outputs for:

PCA/IPCA (R) / tximport (R) / Normalizing and differential expression analysis (R) / Organizing and cleaning gene count files (Excel)

___

### Walsh Lab Killifish Experiments
In this undergraduate research experience (BIOL 2242) with Dr. Matthew Walsh, my teammates and I designed our own experiment to study the generational behaviors of Trinidadian killifish (Anablepsoides hartii). We focused on the effect of predator presence on the grouping behavior of fish from high-predation and killifish-only populations. After digitizing our results and compiling them into a metadata file, we used Python and R to perform statistical and visual analysis, including t-tests and ANOVA F tests.

This project includes code pipelines and outputs for:

Metadata files (Excel) / Visual and statistical data analysis (Python & R) / Anova table (HTML) / Our research paper (PDF)
